---
layout: post
title:  "Molecular Generative Model via Retrosyntheyically prepared Chemical Building BLock Assembly"
date:   2023-01-13 18:01:24 +0900
categories: Synthesizable Library
---
Motivation
=======================
Despite Molecular generative model has promising results, their common design strategy does not explain synthesizability, which is important in developing chemotherpies. Human experts mostly perceive a molecule as a conneceted set of chemical building blocks rather than a simple assembly of atoms. Therefore, the direct consideration of synthesizability can be done by preparing synthetically accessible building blocks using known reaction templates and letting the model learn the implied synthetic validity from the resulting data. 
> Important point is 1. How to prepare Building blocks 2. How to teach model chemical Reaction. 

In this paper, they propose a novel deep generative model for molecular generation, namely building block-based autoregressive generative model (BBAR) which aims to design new molecules with target properties by sequentially adding building blocks to any given starting molecule. 

They used **Synthon-based molecule generation** based on **fragment-based molecule design**.

There are a few fragmeny-based molecular generative models, thought the definition of fragments in those works is different from the building block in this work. Podda et al.[[1]](https://proceedings.mlr.press/v108/podda20a.html) proposed a language model which sequentially generates fragements and combining them into a single molecule. They could achieve the high validity and uniqueness of generted molecules. Yang et al. [[2]](https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2021/hash/41da609c519d77b29be442f8c1105647-Abstract.html) developed a reinfrocement learning model that sequentially adds fragments to a givne core molecule to improve the binding affinity of the resulting molecule to a target protein. 

### Reference
1. Podda, Marco, Davide Bacciu, and Alessio Micheli. "A deep generative model for fragment-based molecule generation." International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics. PMLR, 2020.
2. Yang, Soojung, et al. "Hit and lead discovery with explorative rl and fragment-based molecule generation." Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 34 (2021): 7924-7936.