---
title:  "NetMHCpan-4.0(2017)"
classes: wide
date:   2023-01-19 16:31:24 +0900
categories: 
  - Immunogenecity
tags:
  - T cell-MHC
mathjax: true
---

## Introduction
Cytotoxic T cells perform the task of scrutinizing the surface of cells for the non-self peptides presented in complex with MHC molecules. In cases in which such peptides are recognized, an immune response can be initiated, potentially leading to killing of the infected cell. Binding to MHC is the most selective step in the pathway leading to this peptide presentation. 

Computational method's accuracy to do this kind of task has improved substantially over the last years, and the most recent benchmark results demonstrate that more than 90% of naturally presented MHC ligands are identified at an impressive specificity of 98%. This gain in performance was achieved, in part, by the extended experimental binding datasets made available in the Immune Epitope Database(IEDB) and, in part , by the development of novel machine learning algorithms capable of capturing the information in the experimental binding data in a more effective manner. 

One such novel method is NNAlign-2.0.[[1]](https://academic.oup.com/nar/article/45/W1/W344/3605642?login=false) allowing the integration of peptides of vairable length into the machine-learning framework. This novel training approach allows the incorporation of a larger set of training data and enables the method to directly learn the length preference of presented peptides for each MHC molecule from the experimental binding data. Although most presented MHC class I ligands are 9 aa in length, the ability to incorporate length preferences directly into the model is critical, because experimental data demonstrate that the length profiles of presented ligands can vary substantially between MHC molecules. 

> NetMHC and NetMHCpan has relatively high false positive rate of predicted epitopes.

One potential cause for this relatively high rate of false positive epitope predictions is the fact that most methods are trained on binding affinity(BA) data and, as a consequence, only model the single event of peptide-MHC binding. Other factors including Ag processing and the stability of the peptide-MHC complex [[2]](https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1002/eji.201141774) could influence the likelihood of a given peptide to be represented as an MHC ligand. Similarly, the length distribution of peptide available for binding to MHC molecules is impacted by other steps in the processing and presentation pathway, such as TAP transport[[3]](https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s00018-005-4528-2) and ERAP trimming, which are not reflected in binding data in itself. [[4]](https://journals.aai.org/jimmunol/article/196/4/1480/43223/The-Length-Distribution-of-Class-I-Restricted-T) 

Advances in mass spectrometry(MS) have allowed the field of MS peptidomics to move forward. In this context, recent studies have suggested that training prediction methods on such data, rather than BA data, could improve the ability to accurately identify MHC ligands. Moreover, MS peptidome data generated by immunopeptidomic studies would contain precise information about the allele-specific peptide-length profile preferences that is not availiable in the MHC BA datasets. 

However, the number of MHC molecules characterized by such MS studies will remian limited. In this context, significant efforts over the last decades have been dedicated to experimentally characterizing the peptide-binding space of MHC molecules using semi-high-throughput MHC-peptide BA assays, enabling binding binding-specificity characterization of a large set of MHC molecules from different species. 

The IEDB contains a comprehensive set of MHC-binding and eluted ligand(EL) data available in the public domain. Although this dataset contains BA data characterizing more than 150 MHC class I molecules, at the onset of this study only 55 MHC class I molecules were characterized by MS peptidome data. This imbalance caused us to suggest a novel machine-learning approach integrating in formation from both types of data into a combined framework benefitting from information from the two worlds. The proposed framwork is "pan specific", because it can leverage information across MHC molecules, data types, and peptide lengths into a single model. Hence, we expect this approach to achieve superior predictive performance compared with models trained on the two data types individually, as well as achieve an improved performance when it comes to predicting length profile preferences of different MHC molecules. 

## Materials and Methods
### Data sets

## Reference
1. Nielsen, Morten, and Massimo Andreatta. "NNAlign: a platform to construct and evaluate artificial neural network models of receptor–ligand interactions." Nucleic acids research 45.W1 (2017): W344-W349.
2. Tenzer, S., et al. "Modeling the MHC class I pathway by combining predictions of proteasomal cleavage, TAP transport and MHC class I binding." Cellular and Molecular Life Sciences CMLS 62.9 (2005): 1025-1037.
3. Harndahl, Mikkel, et al. "Peptide‐MHC class I stability is a better predictor than peptide affinity of CTL immunogenicity." European journal of immunology 42.6 (2012): 1405-1416.
4. Trolle, Thomas, et al. "The length distribution of class I–restricted T cell epitopes is determined by both peptide supply and MHC allele–specific binding preference." The Journal of Immunology 196.4 (2016): 1480-1487.